---
title: Present
type: present
---

Currently, scientists are using variable stars and their properties to explore a variety of astronomy's biggest mysteries. Among them is the existence and properties of dark matter. Remember when we talked about Type 1a supernovae? As it turns out, astronomers have attributed the revelation that the universe is expanding at a faster and faster rate to the existence of dark energy pushing the Universe's objects farther and farther from each other. The existence of standard candles like Cepheid variables, RR Lyrae variables, and type 1a supernovae help us chart distances throughout outer space in order to get a better idea of the sheer scope of this expansion.

Computer scientists taking part in computational astronomy are also currently seeing many applications for variables in their ability to reveal previously-unknown characteristics about stars. Astronomers are developing models that can simulate and predict the behavior of certain variables, giving us better ideas as to the conditions that drive stars. After the aggregation of hundreds of thousands of data points about these stars, we can develop models to understand the processes that drive their variability. This could give us insight into stars' chemical compositions, evolutions, luminosity, structure, and mass. Computer models have already shown great promise in helping us determine the behavior of other stars, like pulsars and white dwarfs - so their potential in depicting variable stars is looking to be great.

Spectroscopy is also an area of particular research when it comes to variable stars. Often, the most interesting features of these stars can only be observed in non-visual light parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Certain stars may eject jets of X-ray waves or gamma ray blasts, some stars may be far richer in heavier metals than we expected them to be, and infrared spectroscopy can give us deeper insights into the inner workings of pulsating variables. Some stars even release radio waves! Spectroscopy gives us insights into the deeper characteristics of variable stars that we wouldn't have otherwise known, and it is a particular area of research.

Variable stars have also, of particular note, been used to discover new exoplanets. Thanks to T Tauri stars and their protoplanetary disks, variable stars have given us more insight as to the circumstances that may be more conducive to the formation of a planetary system. Current T Tauri stars have helped us understand how such planetary systems may sustain themselves over time. In addition, small variations of light that may occur when a planet passes in front of a star are crucial in helping us find and determine the characteristics of new exoplanets - and the, well, variability of variable stars gives us a tool with which to measure our distance from them.

Ultimately, variable stars offer a wealth of opportunities that are being actively looked into. There's still so much we don't know about astrophysics and stellar characteristics - variable stars offer us a wide variety of possibilities that we have yet to even scratch the surface of.